SC20-SA-WP-01 (Scoping the Next Generation of Tuna Stock Assessment Software: Progress Report and Outline of Options, Project 123)

A. Magnusson (SPC) presented SC20-SA-WP-01 (Scoping the Next Generation of Tuna
Stock Assessment Software: Progress Report and Outline of Options, Project 123),
describing the current status of the scoping project launched in 2024 and the
progress so far. A key project activity in 2024 was an international expert
meeting with around 40 participants, seeking recommendations and collaboration
with other tuna RFMOs and various research labs. Existing stock assessment
software of particular relevance have been examined, consulting with the
respective development teams: Stock Synthesis, sbt, Gadget, Casal, WHAM, SAM,
and ALSCL. Possible extensions could be developed for these existing software to
match the modelling needs for WCPFC tuna assessments. Alternatively, new
software tailored for future tuna assessments could be designed and developed in
collaboration with other tuna RFMOs. The goal of the main project, which could
either overlap or succeed the current scoping project, is to test/develop tuna
stock assessment software and transition all SPC assessments from MULTIFAN-CL
(MFCL) to other platforms. This will require additional resources beyond the
standard service provision agreement for stock assessments. The main project
would probably require one staff to be dedicated to this work initially and
depending on the direction taken (i.e., use pre-existing software vs. develop
new software) an additional staff or consultant with software development
skills. It is likely that transitioning MFCL assessments to other software is at
least a 5 year proposition.
