**SC21-SA-WP-01** (Scoping the Next Generation of Tuna Stock Assessment
Software: Progress Report, Project 123)

A. Magnusson (SPC) presented SC21-SA-WP-01 (Scoping the Next Generation of Tuna
Stock Assessment Software: Progress Report, Project 123), describing the current
status of the scoping project launched in 2024 and the progress so far. The
first part of the presentation was an evaluation of necessary features for tuna
assessment software. In addition to the technical features, three main criteria
have been identified as requirements: scientific quality, beginner friendly, and
widely used. Stock Synthesis, Gadget, SBT, FIMS, and Casal have been reviewed,
and the recommendation is to launch a new project developing a new software
platform in collaboration with IATTC and other tuna RFMOs. The second part of
the presentation focused on two development work streams that have been
initiated: DTU spatio-temporal analysis of tagging data and a future SPC-IATTC
model for tuna assessments. SPC organized a workshop in May 2025 with Tobias
Mildenberger and Anders Nielsen at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
starting a collaborative project that will analyze WCPO skipjack tagging data
and produce abundance indices that can then be incorporated into a stock
assessment model. An online CAPAM workshop is planned in December 2025 as a
collaboration between SPC and IATTC, focusing on the design of a new software
platform for future tuna assessments. An initial outline has been proposed by
Mark Maunder at IATTC, using the RTMB programming environment and starting with
core features in the first development stage, adding later extensions in the
second stage. A proposal will be presented at SC22 for the development project
that will follow the scoping project. The current recommendation is to have the
development project support both the DTU spatio-temporal tagging analysis and
the development of a new SPC-IATTC assessment model, where the output from the
tagging analysis will be used as data input in the assessment model.
